.. title: NeuroCompMarseille 2010 Workshop
.. slug: 2010-05-27_NeuroCompMarseille_2010Workshop
.. date: 2010-05-27 13:36:57
.. type: text
.. tags: sciblog, neurocomp


.. raw:: html

   <div id="content" dir="ltr" lang="en">

.. rubric:: Computational Neuroscience: From Representations to Behavior
   :name: Computational_Neuroscience:_From_Representations_to_Behavior

.. rubric:: Second NeuroComp Marseille Workshop
   :name: Second_NeuroComp_Marseille_Workshop

.. raw:: html

   </div>

Date
    27-28 May 2010

.. TEASER_END


Location
    Amphithéâtre Charve at the Saint-Charles' University campus - Métro
    : Line 1 et 2 (St Charles), a 5 minute walk from the railway
    station.
    `Map (Amphithéâtre Charve, University Main Entrance,
    etc.) <http://maps.google.com/maps/ms?ie=UTF8&hl=fr&t=h&msa=0&msid=104552809318940980121.0004855ba608957ac9d29&ll=43.297245,5.369546&spn=0.011978,0.027874&z=16>`__
    `Metro, Bus and
    Tramway <http://85.31.207.119/SITERTM_WEB/PagesFlash/pdf/PlanReseau.pdf>`__
    `Getting to Marseille from
    Airport <http://www.navettemarseilleaeroport.com/indexA.php>`__

Registration
    Registration was **free but mandatory**, participation limited to 80
    persons.

Computational Neuroscience emerges now as a major breakthrough in
exploring cognitive functions. It brings together theoretical tools that
elucidate fundamental mechanisms responsible for experimentally observed
behaviour in the applied neurosciences. This is the second Computational
Neuroscience Workshop organized by the `"NeuroComp Marseille"
network <https://wiki.incm.cnrs-mrs.fr/NeuroCompMarseille>`__.

It will focus on latest advances on the understanding of how information
may be represented in neural activity (1st day) and on computational
models of learning, decision-making and motor control (2nd day). The
workshop will bring together leading researchers in these areas of
theoretical neuroscience. The meeting will consist of invited speakers
with sufficient time to discuss and share ideas and data. All
conferences will be in English.

- 27 May 2010 **Neural representations for sensory information & the structure-function relation**

 - 9h00-9h30 Reception and coffee

 - 9h30-10h00 `Laurent Perrinet <https://laurentperrinet.github.io>`_ Institut de Neurosciences Cognitives de la Méditerranée, CNRS and Université de la Méditerranée - Marseille **«Presentation of the Workshop and Topic»**

 - 10h00-11h00 `Gabriel Peyré <http://www.ceremade.dauphine.fr/~peyre/>`_ CNRS and Université Paris-Dauphine `'''«Sparse Geometric Processing of Natural Images»''' <http://www.ceremade.dauphine.fr/~peyre/talks/2010-05-20-neurosciences-marseilles.pdf>`__

In this talk, I will review recent works on the sparse representations of natural
images. I will in particular focus on both the application of
these emerging models to image processing problems, and their potential
implication for the modeling of visual processing.
Natural images exhibit a wide range of geometric regularities, such as
curvilinear edges and oscillating textures. Adaptive image
representations select bases from a dictionary of orthogonal or
redundant frames that are parameterized by the geometry of the image. If
the geometry is well estimated, the image is sparsely represented by
only a few atoms in this dictionary.
On an ingeniering level, these methods can be used to enhance the
resolution of super-resolution inverse problems, and can also be used to
perform texture synthesis. On a biological level, these mathematical
representations share similarities with low level grouping processes
that operate in areas V1 and V2 of the visual brain. We believe both
processing and biological application of geometrical methods work hand
in hand to design and analyze new cortical imaging methods.

 - 11h00-12h00 `Jean Petitot <http://www.crea.polytechnique.fr/JeanPetitot/home.html>`_ Centre d'Analyse et de Mathématique Sociales, Ecole des Hautes Etudes en Sciences Sociales - Paris *«Neurogeometry of visual perception»**

In relation with experimental data, we propose a geometric model of the
functional architecture of the primary visual cortex (V1) explaining
contour integration. The aim is to better understand the type of
geometry algorithms implemented by this functional architecture. The
contact structure of the 1-jet space of the curves in the plane, with
its generalization to the roto-translation group, symplectifications,
and sub-Riemannian geometry, are all neurophysiologically realized by
long-range horizontal connections. Virtual structures, such as illusory
contours of the Kanizsa type, can then be explained by this model.

 - 14h00-14h45 `Peggy Series <http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/pseries/>`_ Institute for Adaptive and Neural Computation, Edinburgh **«Bayesian Priors in Perception and Decision Making»**

We'll present two recent projects:

The first project (with M. Chalk and A. R. Seitz) is an experimental
investigation of the influence of expectations on the perception of
simple stimuli. Using a simple task involving estimation and detection
of motion random dots displays, we examined whether expectations can be
developed quickly and implicitly and how they affect perception. We find
that expectations lead to attractive biases such that stimuli appear as
being more similar to the expected one than they really are, as well as
visual hallucinations in the absence of a stimulus. We discuss our
findings in terms of Bayesian Inference.

In the second project (with A. Kalra and Q. Huys), we explore the
concepts of optimism and pessimism in decision making. Optimism is
usually assessed using questionnaires, such as the LOT-R. Here, using a
very simple behavioral task, we show that optimism can be described in
terms of a prior on expected future rewards. We examine the correlation
between the shape of this prior for individual subjects and their scores
on questionnaires, as well as with other measures of personality traits.

 - 14h45-15h45 `Heiko Neumann <http://www.informatik.uni-ulm.de/ni/staff/HNeumann/>`_ (in collaboration with Florian Raudies) Inst. of Neural Information Processing, Ulm University Germany **«Cortical mechanisms of transparent motion perception – a neural model»**

Transparent motion is perceived when multiple motions different in
directions and/or speeds are presented in the same part of visual space.
In perceptual experiments the conditions have been studied under which
motion transparency occurs. An upper limit in the number of perceived
transparent layers has been investigated psychophysically. Attentional
signals can improve the perception of a single motion amongst several
motions. While criteria for the occurrence of transparent motion have
been identified only few potential neural mechanisms have been discussed
so far to explain the conditions and mechanisms for segregating multiple
motions. A neurodynamical model is presented which builds upon a previously
developed neural architecture emphasizing the role of feedforward
cascade processing and feedback from higher to earlier stages for
selective feature enhancement and tuning. Results of computational
experiments are consistent with findings from physiology and
psychophysics. Finally, the model is demonstrated to cope with realistic
data from computer vision benchmark databases.
Work supported by European Union (project SEARISE), BMBF, and CELEST

 - 16h00-17h00 `Rudolf Friedrich <http://pauli.uni-muenster.de/tp/index.php?id=9&L=1>`_ Institute für Theoretische Physik Westfälische Wilhelms Universität Münster ** «Windows to Complexity: Disentangling Trends and Fluctuations inComplex Systems»**

In the present talk, we discuss how to perform an analysis of
experimental data of complex systems by disentangling the effects of
dynamical noise (fluctuations) and deterministic dynamics (trends). We
report on results obtained for various complex systems like turbulent
fields, the motion of dissipative solitons in nonequilibrium systems,
traffic flows, and biological data like human tremor data and brain
signals. Special emphasis is put on methods to predict the occurrence of
qualitative changes in systems far from equilibrium.
[1] R. Friedrich, J. Peinke, M. Reza Rahimi Tabar: Importance of
Fluctuations: Complexity in the View of stochastic Processes (in:
Springer Encyclopedia on Complexity and System Science, (2009))

 - 17h00-17h45 General Discussion

- 28 May 2010 **Computational models of learning and decision making**

 - 9h30-10h00 `Andrea Brovelli <http://brovelli.free.fr/>`_ Institut de Neurosciences Cognitives de la Méditerranée, CNRS and Université de la Méditerranée - Marseille **«An introduction to Motor Learning, Decision-Making and Motor Control»**

 - 10h00-11h00 `Emmanuel Daucé <http://emmanuel.dauce.free.fr>`_ Mouvement & Perception, UMR 6152, Faculté des sciences du sport **«Adapting the noise to the problem : a Policy-gradient approach of receptive fields formation»**

In machine learning, Kernel methods are give a consistent framework for
applying the perceptron algorithm to non-linear problems. In
reinforcement learning, the analog of the perceptron delta-rule is
called the "policy-gradient" approch proposed by Williams in 1992 in the
framework of stochastic neural networks. Despite its generality and
straighforward applicability to continuous command problems, quite few
developments of the method have been proposed since. Here we present an
account of the use of a kernel transformation of the perception space
for learning a motor command, in the case of eye orientation and
multi-joint arm control. We show that such transformation allows the
system to learn non-linear transformation, like the log-like resolution
of a foveated retina, or the transformation from a cartesian perception
space to a log-polar command, by shaping appropriate receptive fields
from the perception to the command space. We also present a method for
using multivariate correlated noise for learning high-DOF control
problems, and propose some interpretations on the putative role of
correlated noise for learning in biological systems.

 - 11h00-12h00 `Máté Lengyel <http://www.eng.cam.ac.uk/~ml468/>`_ Computational & Biological Learning Lab, Department of Engineering, University of Cambridge **«Why remember? Episodic versus semantic memories for optimal decision making»**

Memories are only useful inasmuch as they allow us to act adaptively in
the world. Previous studies on the use of memories for decision making
have almost exclusively focussed on implicit rather than declarative
memories, and even when they did address declarative memories they dealt
only with semantic but not episodic memories. In fact, from a purely
computational point of view, it seems wasteful to have memories that are
episodic in nature: why should it be better to act on the basis of the
recollection of single happenings (episodic memory), rather than the
seemingly normative use of accumulated statistics from multiple events
(semantic memory)? Using the framework of reinforcement learning, and
Markov decision processes in particular, we analyze in depth the
performance of episodic versus semantic memory-based control in a
sequential decision task under risk and uncertainty in a class of simple
environments. We show that episodic control should be useful in a range
of cases characterized by complexity and inferential noise, and most
particularly at the very early stages of learning, long before
habitization (the use of implicit memories) has set in. We interpret
data on the transfer of control from the hippocampus to the striatum in
the light of this hypothesis.

 - 14h00-15h00 `Rafal Bogacz <http://www.cs.bris.ac.uk/~rafal/>`_ Department of Computer Science, University of Bristol **«Optimal decision making and reinforcement learning in the cortico-basal-ganglia circuit»**

During this talk I will present a computational model describing
decision making process in the cortico-basal ganglia circuit. The model
assumes that this circuit performs statistically optimal test that
maximizes speed of decisions for any required accuracy. In the model,
this circuit computes probabilities that considered alternatives are
correct, according to Bayes’ theorem. This talk will show that the
equation of Bayes’ theorem can be mapped onto the functional anatomy of
a circuit involving the cortex, basal ganglia and thalamus. This theory
provides many precise and counterintuitive experimental predictions,
ranging from neurophysiology to behaviour. Some of these predictions
have been already validated in existing data and others are a subject of
ongoing experiments. During the talk I will also discuss the
relationships between the above model and current theories of
reinforcement learning in the cortico-basal-ganglia circuit.

 - 15h30-16h30 `Emmanuel Guigon <http://e.guigon.free.fr/>`_ Institut des Systèmes Intelligents et de Robotique, UPMC - CNRS / UMR 7222 **«Optimal feedback control as a principle for adaptive control of posture and movement»**

 - 16h30-17h15 *General Discussion*
